LatticeWM commands.

(anchor-float &optional (path (current-path)))
  Pin the focused floating window to the pane at PATH.
  
  An anchored float travels with the pane it belongs to: it moves when the pane
  moves, hides when the pane hides, and is clipped by the pane's clip box.  That
  is what "a floating window inside a window" means here — a picture-in-picture,
  a preview, a terminal that follows its editor across the plane.
  
  Costs one slot on the float.  The alternative — floats pinned to the output —
  is still the default, because most floats are dialogs and a dialog belongs to
  the screen rather than to a pane.

(apropos-command)
  Search every command by name and by documentation, and show what matches.
  
  Emacs's C-h a.  The one question a discoverable system has to be able to
  answer is `is there a command for this', and neither the keymap nor M-x can
  answer it — the keymap only knows what somebody bound, and M-x only matches
  names.  This reads the docstrings, so `screen' finds `toggle-fullscreen' even
  though the word does not occur in its name.

(browser)
  Open a web browser.  Bound to `b' in an empty pane by default.

(captures)
  Say what is being recorded right now, and by how many sessions.
  
  The status line carries a standing REC while anything is being captured, which
  answers `is something recording?'.  This answers the next question — *what* —
  and it is worth a command of its own because the answer includes windows you
  cannot see: a minimized window, or one four cells away, goes on being recorded
  exactly as it was, which is the whole reason river reports the count per window
  as well as per screen.

(clear)
  Empty the focused pane but leave it standing.
  
  You are now *in* an empty pane, which still occupies its space.  DESIGN D17's
  CLEAR: a separate verb from CLOSE rather than a mode, because they are
  different intentions and a mode would make you remember which one you were in.
  
  The window itself is closed; what survives is the place.

(close)
  Close the focused window, and take its pane with it.
  
  The sibling grows to fill the space.  DESIGN D17's CLOSE; see CLEAR for the
  other half.

(close-float)
  Close the focused floating window.

(describe-command name)
  Show a command's documentation, its arguments and the keys that run it.
  
  Emacs's C-h f, and the reason the docstrings in this system are written as
  paragraphs rather than as labels: this is where they are read.

(describe-key spec)
  Say what SPEC is bound to, and what that does.  Emacs's C-h k.
  
  SPEC is written the way a binding is: Super+Return, Ctrl+Super+h, C-x.

(describe-option name)
  Show a configuration value: what it is now, what it shipped as, and why.
  
  Every option in this system carries a paragraph explaining what turning it off
  costs you, and this is where those paragraphs are read.

(editor)
  Open an editor.  Bound to `e' in an empty pane by default.

(equalize)
  Give every pane in the focused container an equal share.
  
  Applies to the nearest enclosing split.  With a prefix of nothing else, this is
  the command people reach for after ten minutes of resizing.

(equalize-all)
  Give every pane in the whole workspace an equal share.

(eval-expression)
  Type a Lisp form and evaluate it.  Emacs's M-:.
  
  The form is read in LATTICEWM/USER — the same package as your init.lisp — so
  everything is visible without a prefix, and it runs in the window manager's own
  thread, so it may touch the compositor:
  
      (setf *gaps* 12)
      (relayout :force t)
      (mapcar #'window-app-id (all-windows))
  
  The result appears in the echo area and in the log, and is bound to $ for the
  next expression.  This is the whole live-image argument reduced to one
  keystroke: no SWANK, no editor, no second machine — the running window manager
  will simply answer a question about itself.

(files)
  Open a file manager.  Bound to `f' in an empty pane by default.

(focus direction)
  Move the cursor one pane DIRECTION — :LEFT, :RIGHT, :UP or :DOWN.
  
  Motion is continuous across every boundary: within a split, out of a split
  when the direction crosses its axis, and — once the lattice is loaded — into
  the cell next door, entering through the edge you crossed.  Bumping the edge of
  the world does nothing, and that is not an error.

(focus-float &optional (step 1))
  Move keyboard focus to the next floating window, or back to the tree.
  
  Cycling past the last float returns focus to the cursor, so one key both enters
  and leaves the float layer and there is no mode to be stuck in.
  
  This command exists because focus is a *place in the tree* (D18) and a float is
  deliberately not in the tree.  That is the right model — it is what makes
  'move one cell left whether or not anything is there' mean something — but it
  leaves floats with no way to be focused at all, and a floating window you
  cannot type into is not a floating window.  WORLD-FOCUSED-FLOAT is the one slot
  that fixes it, and this is the verb that sets it.

(focus-next)
  Move the cursor to the next pane in layout order, wrapping.

(focus-output which)
  Move the cursor to another screen — a direction, or a number from one.
  
  Nothing on either screen changes: no window moves and neither monitor is asked
  to display anything different.  You arrive where you last were on that screen
  rather than at its first pane, which is *REMEMBER-PLACE* and is the difference
  between a command worth pressing and one you try once.
  
  You will not often need this, and that is deliberate: plain motion crosses the
  screen boundary on its own when you walk off the edge — see
  *MOTION-CROSSES-OUTPUTS*.  This is the version for when you are in the middle
  of a screen and do not want to walk.

(focus-path path)
  Move the cursor to PATH, a list of addresses from the root.

(focus-previous)
  Move the cursor to the previous pane in layout order, wrapping.

(focus-tiled)
  Take keyboard focus off any floating window and give it back to the cursor.

(gather-tag name)
  Bring every window tagged NAME to the workspace you are on.
  
  The `set up my project' verb: tag the four windows once, and afterwards one
  keystroke collects them wherever they have drifted to.

(goto-named-cell)
  Type a name and jump to whatever has it.
  
  Works for anything with a label — the lattice's named cells, and any node you
  have named yourself.

(help)
  Show every key binding on screen, with what it does.
  
  Built from the live keymap and each command's own docstring, so it includes
  anything you bound yourself and cannot go out of date.  Any key dismisses it.

(jump-to-tag name)
  Go to the window carrying tag NAME, wherever it is.
  
  A minimized one is restored first, which is what makes a tag and a named
  scratchpad the same feature seen twice.

(keyboard-layout name)
  Set the keyboard layout for every keyboard: "us", "de", "fr".
  
  Compiles a keymap with xkbcli and hands it to river, so it changes what the
  keys do for every application on the machine — and adopts the matching shift
  map so that this window manager's own prompt agrees with the keyboard.
  
  Persistent for the session but not across one: put it in *XKB-LAYOUT* to keep
  it.

(list-inputs &optional name)
  Print every input device, or the ones whose name contains NAME.
  
  The answer to `what is my touchpad called', which is the first question
  *INPUT-RULES* asks and the one nothing else on a river system will tell you.
  Everything printed here is settable; the value shown is what the *device* says
  is in force, not what the configuration asked for, so the two disagreeing is
  visible rather than mysterious.

(list-scratchpads)
  Show every named scratchpad and what is on it.

(list-tags)
  Show every tag and the windows carrying it.

(load-extension name)
  Load an extension system by name, from wherever it is installed.
  
      (load-extension "lattice")
  
  Prefer this to a bare (asdf:load-system ...) in a configuration file: it knows
  where an *installed* LatticeWM keeps its systems, it does nothing when the
  system is already in the image, and it reports a failure as a message rather
  than as an error that stops the rest of your configuration from loading.

(load-font command)
  Load a PSF console font from a path and use it everywhere.
  
      M-x load-font  /usr/share/kbd/consolefonts/ter-124n.psf.gz
  
  The whole of what changing the font takes, from a prompt, with no restart:
  the overlays are redrawn from the new metrics on the next frame.  For a
  font in one place only, write a FONT-FOR method instead.

(minimize)
  Take the focused window out of the tiling tree entirely.
  
  The remaining windows retile without it.  Minimize is not 'hide it somewhere',
  it is 'take it out of the layout' — and where it went is the scratchpad, which
  RESTORE-LAST brings it back from.

(move direction &key (join nil))
  Move the focused pane DIRECTION, onto whatever is there.
  
  JOIN says what landing on something occupied means — :SPLIT, :SWAP or :STACK —
  and defaults to the policy's answer, which ships as :SPLIT.  Landing on an
  *empty* pane always fills it, whatever JOIN says, because an empty pane is a
  place someone made for something.
  
  This is the verb that satisfies 'you can move a window to be a split window in
  another window': the destination does not have to be adjacent in the tree, only
  adjacent on screen.

(move-float direction &optional (pixels 40))
  Nudge the focused floating window DIRECTION.
  
  Floats are positioned by hand, which is the point of floating them; this is
  the keyboard half of that.

(name-this)
  Give the focused node a name, so it can be jumped to by it.

(new-workspace)
  Add a workspace after the current one and switch to it.

(next-keyboard-layout)
  Switch to the next layout of the current keymap, wrapping.
  
  For a keymap compiled from "us,de": this is the other half of what
  `grp:alt_shift_toggle' does, available as a command so it can be on any key you
  like rather than only on the chord xkb reserves.

(next-workspace &optional (step 1))
  Switch to the next workspace, wrapping.

(previous-workspace)
  Switch to the previous workspace, wrapping.

(pull direction)
  Bring the pane DIRECTION of here *into* the focused pane, as a split.
  
  The inverse of MOVE, and the reason it exists separately: pulling does not
  require navigating to the thing first.  You stay where you are and the window
  comes to you.

(quit)
  Exit the session.  This logs you out.

(raise-float)
  Put the focused floating window on top of the other floats.

(redo)
  Undo an undo.

(reload-config)
  Re-read the configuration file.
  
  Note that this only re-runs the file; anything you redefined at a REPL and did
  not write down is unaffected, and anything the file *removed* since last time
  is not undone.  Live redefinition is not transactional, and pretending it is
  would be worse than saying so.

(reload-input)
  Re-apply the input configuration to every device.
  
  What to run after changing an option at a REPL.  Nothing else needs it: a
  device that arrives later is configured when it arrives, and the settings are
  diffed, so running this when nothing has changed sends nothing.

(remove-pane)
  Remove the focused pane entirely, whether or not it holds anything.

(repeat)
  Run the last command again, with the same arguments.
  
  Emacs's C-x z, vi's `.', and the reason a command that took three prompts to
  say is one keystroke to say twice.

(resize direction &optional (amount *resize-amount*))
  Grow the focused pane DIRECTION by AMOUNT of its container's total.
  
  AMOUNT is a *fraction of the container*: 1/20 makes the pane one twentieth of
  the container wider and its neighbour one twentieth narrower.  That is what the
  sentence above always claimed and what the code now does — it used to multiply
  by an undocumented constant 4, which happened to be right only when the
  container held exactly four children, and named no unit anywhere.
  
  Resizing is a *transfer* between two adjacent children rather than an
  assignment, so dragging one divider never disturbs the divider beyond it —
  which is the single most common complaint about tiling resize.
  
  Because the shares are relative, this behaves identically at every zoom level
  and on every monitor, and needs to know nothing about pixels.

(resize-float direction &optional (pixels 40))
  Grow or shrink the focused floating window DIRECTION.

(restart-wm)
  Restart the window manager without ending the session.
  
  River keeps running, and so does every application; the window manager is an
  ordinary Wayland client.  This saves the layout, disconnects, and starts the
  same binary again with the same arguments — the layout comes back, because
  persistence is keyed on river's stable window identifiers.
  
  IT DID NOT RESTART, AND THAT IS THE WHOLE OF THIS DOCSTRING'S HISTORY.  It
  cleared the running flag and exited, under a docstring that said "Relaunch it
  and the layout comes back" — addressed to somebody who no longer had a keymap,
  because the keymap belongs to the window manager that just left.  install.sh
  writes `exec river -c latticewm', which runs the client once and does not
  respawn it, so the user was left with their windows, no bindings, and recovery
  by way of a TTY.  It is bound to Shift+Super+r by default.
  
  The relaunch happens in MAIN, after START has returned and the Wayland
  connection is closed, and that ordering is the point rather than tidiness:
  river hands window management to one client at a time, so a successor spawned
  from here — inside the event loop, with our manager object still bound — would
  race us for it and lose.

(restore-last)
  Bring back the most recently minimized window.
  
  To the slot it was minimized from if that slot still exists, and to the cursor
  otherwise.

(run-command-by-name)
  Type a command name and run it.  Emacs's M-x.
  
  Tab completes, Return runs, Escape cancels, Up walks back through what you ran
  before.  Every command in the system is reachable this way — including the ones
  that take arguments, which are asked for one at a time once the name is in —
  and that is what lets the keymap be the commands you use often rather than the
  only ones that exist.

(scratchpad-put name)
  Put the focused window away under a name, to be summoned by that name later.
  
  i3's named scratchpad.  The existing minimize is a flat most-recently-hidden
  list, so `bring back my music player' means restoring things one at a time
  until it turns up; with a name it is one keystroke, and the same keystroke puts
  it away again.

(scratchpad-show name)
  Summon the window on the scratchpad called NAME.

(scratchpad-toggle name)
  Summon the NAME scratchpad, or put it away again if it is already up.
  
  One key, both directions.  That is the whole point of a scratchpad: the
  terminal you consult twenty times an hour should cost one keystroke each way
  and should never need to be found.

(send-to-output which &key (follow nil))
  Move the focused pane to another screen — a direction, or a number from one.
  
  SEND-TO-WORKSPACE with the number looked up instead of typed, so everything it
  argues about landing on a *place inside* the workspace rather than on the
  workspace holds here without being restated.  FOLLOW takes you with it.

(send-to-workspace number &key (follow nil))
  Move the focused pane to workspace NUMBER, counting from one.
  
  This is TREE-MOVE and nothing else — because a workspace is a container and a
  pane is a subtree, 'send to workspace' needed no code of its own.
  
  IT LANDS ON A *PLACE INSIDE* THE WORKSPACE, NOT ON THE WORKSPACE.  The
  difference is invisible while a workspace is a single pane and destructive the
  moment it is anything else.  It used to address the workspace node, which was
  right for the empty leaf the core ships and wrong for every richer shape: send
  a window to a lattice workspace and the whole *plane* became one half of a
  split, viewport and all, with the window as the other half.  A plane is not a
  pane and must not be treated as one by anything that can also be handed a pane.
  
  DESCEND-TO-LEAF with no direction is the question actually being asked — 'where
  inside this thing does a non-directional arrival go?' — and it is answered by
  ENTRY-ADDRESS, per container kind.  A leaf answers with itself, so the core
  behaviour is unchanged to the character.  A grid answers with a cell, which is
  how a window sent to another plane arrives in a cell of it rather than beside
  it.  Neither this command nor the core knows which happened.
  
  THE EMPTY-WORKSPACE PATH USED TO DUPLICATE THE WINDOW, and it is worth writing
  down because the shape of the mistake recurs.  Every surgery function in
  model/ is *pure*: it returns (values REMOVED NEW-ROOT NEW-PATH) and mutates
  nothing above the subtree it was handed.  The old code bound only the first
  value, ignored it, discarded the new root entirely, and then called
  TREE-REPLACE-AT on the *original* root — which still contained the node at
  FROM.  So the removal never happened and the window ended up in both
  workspaces, live in two places at once.
  
  Callers that ignore a surgery function's second value have a bug they have not
  noticed yet; this one had it for the life of the command.

(set-input name property value)
  Set one input PROPERTY to VALUE on every device whose name contains NAME.
  
  For finding out what you want before writing it down:
  
      (set-input "Touchpad" :natural-scroll t)
  
  It is deliberately *not* persistent — it adds no rule and survives no restart —
  because a setting you cannot find again is worse than one you have to type
  twice.  Put the answer in *INPUT-RULES* once you like it.

(set-option name value)
  Change a configuration value, now, without restarting anything.
  
      M-x set-option  gaps  8
  
  VALUE is read as a Lisp object, so a number is a number, a string wants its
  quotes, and a colour is a list: (0.9 0.5 0.2 1.0).
  
  This is the tier-0 half of DESIGN's live-reconfiguration argument made
  available without a REPL.  Nothing here is written to your init.lisp — put it
  there when you are sure, and until then the cost of being wrong is one more
  prompt.

(spawn &rest command)
  Run COMMAND as a detached process.
  
      (spawn "foot")
      (spawn "firefox" "--new-window")
  
  From M-x this is the run-a-program prompt, and what you type is split on
  spaces the way a shell would split it.
  
  The child is detached and its output goes nowhere, so a program that writes to
  stderr cannot fill a pipe nobody is reading and block.
  
  When *SPAWN-DIRECTORY* is bound, the child starts there.  The directory is
  changed and put back around RUN-PROGRAM because neither it nor anything under
  it takes a working directory; the window manager is single-threaded where
  commands run, so the window in which another thread could observe the moved
  directory does not exist.

(split &optional axis (side after))
  Split the focused pane, leaving an *empty* pane beside it.
  
  AXIS is :HORIZONTAL, :VERTICAL, or NIL to let the policy choose — which by
  default cuts along the longer side so panes tend towards square.
  
  This is DESIGN D17's resize idiom, and the empty pane it makes is a
  first-class object rather than a gap waiting to be filled: you split a pane and
  leave one side empty, and the window occupies the rest.  The cursor moves into
  the new empty pane, where — per D19 — typing a key spawns something.

(swap direction)
  Exchange the focused pane with the one DIRECTION of it.
  
  Neither changes shape and nothing else moves — the cheap, predictable way to
  rearrange.  The cursor follows the pane you were in, so swapping twice returns
  you exactly where you were.

(tab)
  Turn the focused pane and its next sibling into tabs.
  
  A stack is what tabs are — an ordered set of alternatives of which one is
  current — so this is the same object a workspace list is, and every verb that
  works on one works on the other.

(tab-next &optional (step 1))
  Show the next tab of the nearest enclosing stack.
  
  Also how you switch workspaces, because a workspace list *is* a stack — see
  NEXT-WORKSPACE, which is this command aimed at the root.

(tab-previous)
  Show the previous tab of the nearest enclosing stack.

(tag-window name)
  Give the focused window a tag, so it can be found by name.
  
  A tag travels with the window rather than with the place, which is what makes
  it useful: `jump to mail' finds your mail client wherever it has ended up,
  across workspaces, across cells, and after any amount of rearranging.

(terminal)
  Open a terminal.  Bound to `t' in an empty pane by default.

(toggle-float)
  Float the focused window, or put a floating one back into the tree.
  
  Floating is per window and chosen, never inferred and forced: SHOULD-FLOAT-P
  only supplies the initial guess, and this is how you overrule it.

(toggle-fullscreen)
  Make the focused window the only thing on its output, or stop.
  
  Cheap in both directions: river ignores clip boxes and does not draw borders
  while fullscreen, so entering and leaving cost no relayout.

(unanchor-float)
  Pin the focused floating window to the output instead of to a pane.

(undo)
  Put the layout back the way it was before the last thing that changed it.
  
  Windows are not closed or opened by this — only their arrangement is restored,
  because a window manager cannot un-quit an application and pretending otherwise
  would be worse than not offering it.  A window that has closed since is simply
  absent from the tree that comes back.
  
  REDO takes you forward again, and anything you do after an undo abandons the
  forward branch, which is what every editor does.

(undo-history)
  Show what UNDO would walk back through.

(untab)
  Dissolve the nearest enclosing stack back into a split.
  
  Every child becomes a pane side by side, which is the inverse of TAB: the
  alternatives stop being alternatives and all become visible at once.

(untag-window name)
  Take a tag off the focused window.

(welcome)
  Show the handful of keys worth knowing before anything else.
  
  This is what appears by itself the first time LatticeWM runs.  Super+/ is the
  complete keymap; this is the short version, and it ends with how to quit
  because a window manager you cannot leave is a frightening thing to try.

(workspace number)
  Switch to workspace NUMBER, creating it and any before it if needed.
  
  *Workspaces are numbered from one*, because that is what is written on the key
  you press to reach them and what everybody says out loud.  The index into the
  stack is one less, and that conversion happens here rather than leaking into
  the keymap, the help screen and every conversation about the thing.
  
  Workspaces are a stack at the root of the tree, so this is the same operation
  as switching a tab — and 'infinite workspaces' costs nothing, because a stack
  grows.

