LatticeWM options.  Set any of these in ~/.config/latticewm/init.lisp
($XDG_CONFIG_HOME is honoured if it is set.)

*ACCEL-PROFILE*
  default: NIL
  How pointer speed responds to how fast you move.
  
    NIL        leave the device's own default alone
    :ADAPTIVE  faster movement covers more ground — what a touchpad wants
    :FLAT      one to one — what a gaming mouse and a drawing tablet want
    :NONE      no acceleration handling at all

*ACCEL-SPEED*
  default: NIL
  Pointer speed, from -1 (slowest) through 0 (the device's default) to 1.
  
  A double float or NIL.  The scale is libinput's and is not linear; 0.3 is a
  noticeably brisk touchpad and 1.0 is faster than most people can aim.

*ANNOUNCE-CAPTURE*
  default: T
  Say in the echo area when a screen capture starts or stops.
  
  T is the privacy-preserving default and the reason the events are handled at
  all.  The standing REC segment in the shipped status line is separate and is
  not affected by this — set the option to NIL if you want the fact on screen
  without a line about it every time OBS adds a source.

*ARGUMENT-NAMING-CONVENTION*
  default: ((:DIRECTION "direction") (:AXIS "axis") (:SIDE "side")
            (:NUMBER "number" "count" "steps" "step" "by" "index" "cols" "rows"
             "cells" "columns" "visible" "x" "y")
            (:FRACTION "amount" "fraction" "weight")
            (:PIXELS "pixels" "distance") (:SHELL-COMMAND "command" "program")
            (:KEY "spec" "key") (:NAME "name" "label")
            (:STRING "text" "string" "title") (:SEXP "form" "expression"))
  Which kind of value a command's parameter holds, keyed by its name.
  
  A convention rather than a declaration, so that a command written the obvious
  way is interactively callable without its author doing anything.  Every
  parameter name in the shipped commands is here, which is not a coincidence:
  they were named to read well in a docstring, and a name that reads well in a
  docstring is a name that says what kind of thing it is.
  
  Where a name is genuinely ambiguous — SPAWN's COMMAND is a shell command line
  and DESCRIBE-COMMAND's NAME is one of ours — DEFCOMMAND's (:interactive ...)
  clause says so at the command instead of bending the table.
  
  PATH is deliberately absent.  A tree path is a list of integers that nobody
  should be asked to type, and leaving it out of the table is what makes M-x
  say so rather than putting up a prompt that cannot be answered.

*BORDER-WIDTH*
  default: 2
  Border thickness in pixels, drawn by the compositor around every window.

*BROWSER*
  default: "firefox"
  The web browser the `browser' command runs.

*CLICK-METHOD*
  default: NIL
  How a touchpad press becomes a left, middle or right click.
  
    NIL             leave the device's own default alone
    :BUTTON-AREAS   the bottom of the pad is divided into left/middle/right
    :CLICKFINGER    one, two or three fingers on the pad choose the button
  
  :CLICKFINGER is what a MacBook does and what most people mean by `it should
  just work'; :BUTTON-AREAS is what a ThinkPad's physical buttons imply.  The
  default is NIL because libinput already picks the right one per device far
  more often than a global setting could.

*CLICK-TO-FOCUS*
  default: T
  Clicking a window moves the cursor to it.
  
  On by default, because a pointer that can point at a window but not focus it is
  a pointer that does not work.  Driven by river's window_interaction event
  rather than by watching buttons, so it covers touch and tablet input too.

*CLICK-TO-RAISE*
  default: T
  Clicking a floating window puts it on top of the other floats.
  
  Only floats: tiled windows do not overlap, so raising one means nothing.

*COLLAPSE-DEGENERATE-SPLITS*
  default: T
  Dissolve a split once it is down to one child.
  
  T is Emacs's behaviour and keeps the tree shallow.  NIL is i3's, where an
  emptied container persists and can be filled again.

*CURSOR-BORDER-COLOR*
  default: (0.28 0.42 0.62 1.0)
  Border colour of the pane holding the cursor while a *float* has the keyboard.
  
  Between the focused and the unfocused colour, deliberately, because that is
  exactly what the state is.  Focus is a place and a floating window is not in
  the tree, so while a dialog has the keyboard the cursor is still standing
  somewhere — and you need to be able to see where, because that is where
  dismissing the dialog puts you back.
  
  Set it equal to *UNFOCUSED-BORDER-COLOR* if you would rather the tree went
  completely quiet while a float is up.

*CURSOR-SIZE*
  default: 24
  The xcursor size in logical pixels.

*CURSOR-THEME*
  default: NIL
  The xcursor theme name, or NIL to leave the compositor's default alone.

*DEBUG-ON-ERROR*
  default: NIL
  Let errors reach the debugger instead of being logged and swallowed.
  
  For a REPL that is attached to a running window manager, which is what this
  program is for.  With it set, GUARDED, BEST-EFFORT and WITH-ABANDON decline to
  handle: the condition keeps going, and if SLIME is connected you get the
  debugger, the real stack, and the restarts -- including ABANDON, which is what
  you almost always want to pick.
  
  *WITH NOTHING ATTACHED, SETTING THIS WILL EXIT THE WINDOW MANAGER* on the first
  error, because the debugger hook installed at startup has nowhere to put a
  prompt and says so rather than blocking forever on a stream nobody is reading.
  That is the honest behaviour and it is why this is off by default.
  
  There was no such option.  The whole reported surface of an error in user code
  was one line of text, in a program whose entire thesis is that you edit it
  while it runs.

*DISABLE-WHILE-TYPING*
  default: T
  Ignore the touchpad briefly after a keystroke, so a palm does not move the
  cursor mid-sentence.
  
  libinput calls this `dwt'.  On by default because the failure it prevents —
  the cursor jumping into the middle of a line you are typing — is one people
  blame on the machine rather than on a setting.

*DRAG-LOCK*
  default: NIL
  Keep a tap-drag going across a brief lift of the finger.
  
    NIL       off
    :TIMEOUT  the drag survives a short pause and then ends by itself
    :STICKY   the drag continues until you tap again
  
  Off by default because a drag that does not end when you lift your finger is
  astonishing the first time it happens.

*ECHO-ACCENT*
  default: (0.4 0.65 1.0 1.0)
  Colour for the part of the echo area that says where you are.

*ECHO-AREA*
  default: T
  Show a status line along the bottom of the screen.
  
  It reports where the cursor is, what is on this workspace, and the last
  message.  Turn it off if you want the screen entirely to yourself; you will
  lose the only permanent indication of which cell you are in.

*ECHO-BACKGROUND*
  default: (0.09 0.09 0.12 0.92)
  Echo area background, as (R G B A).  Slightly translucent by default so it
  reads as an overlay rather than as a window.

*ECHO-DIVIDER*
  default: (0.28 0.28 0.34 1.0)
  Colour of the separators between echo-area segments.
  
  Dim on purpose: a separator is punctuation, and punctuation you notice is
  punctuation that is too loud.

*ECHO-FOREGROUND*
  default: (0.75 0.78 0.85 1.0)
  Echo area text colour.

*ECHO-HEIGHT*
  default: 24
  Height of the echo area in pixels.

*ECHO-MESSAGE-SECONDS*
  default: 6
  How long a message stays in the echo area before it is dropped.

*ECHO-POSITION*
  default: :BOTTOM
  Which edge the echo area sits on: :BOTTOM or :TOP.
  
  Bottom is Emacs's minibuffer and is the default.  Top is worth knowing about
  for two situations: running nested inside another desktop whose panel is along
  the bottom, and any setup where something else already owns that edge.

*ECHO-SCALE*
  default: 1
  Integer scale factor for echo-area text.
  
  1 is the font's own size — sixteen pixels tall, which is an ordinary status
  bar.  2 is for a HiDPI display, where it is again ordinary rather than large.
  There is no half step, deliberately: a bitmap font scaled by anything but a
  whole number is a smear, and a bitmap font scaled by a whole number is crisp
  at any size.

*EDITOR*
  default: "emacs"
  The editor the `editor' command runs.

*EMPTY-HINT-COLOR*
  default: (0.7 0.75 0.86 1.0)
  Text colour of the hint inside the focused empty pane.

*EMPTY-OUTLINE-COLOR*
  default: (0.3 0.32 0.4 0.55)
  Outline colour of an unfocused empty pane.

*EMPTY-PANE-COLOR*
  default: (0.42 0.56 0.78 1.0)
  Border colour drawn around a focused empty pane.
  
  Deliberately bright.  DESIGN D18 accepts, as a cost of focus being a place,
  that "you can stand somewhere that typing does not reach", and names the
  mitigation: "the cursor being unmissable — that is not optional polish, it is
  what stops an empty pane reading as a broken keyboard."  A subtle colour here
  is not a taste choice, it is the failure the ruling warned about.

*EMPTY-PANE-HINT*
  default: T
  Show which keys open something, inside the focused empty pane.

*EMPTY-PANE-KEYS*
  default: ((#\e . "editor") (#\t . "terminal") (#\b . "browser")
            (#\f . "files"))
  DESIGN D19's keysym-to-command table for typing in an empty pane.
  
  While the cursor rests on an empty pane, an unbound printable key is looked up
  here and the named command is run, so the empty pane is a spawn menu with no
  menu.  It has to be a table rather than a single default because the keystroke
  is consumed as a trigger and cannot be replayed into the application that
  opens — nothing in either river protocol synthesises input — so under a single
  default, typing `ls` at an empty pane opens a terminal showing `s`.

*FILE-MANAGER*
  default: "thunar"
  The file manager the `files' command runs.

*FLOAT-DIALOGS*
  default: T
  Float windows that river reports as having a parent — dialogs, file
  pickers and similar.

*FLOAT-FIXED-SIZE-LIMIT*
  default: (900 . 700)
  The largest a fixed-size window may be and still be floated for it.
  
  A window that pins its minimum and maximum size to the same value is announcing
  that it is a dialog — and that signal is right often enough to be the second
  half of the shipped floating rule.  It is also *wrong* for a class of
  application, which is why there is a limit here:
  
    * a number of GTK and Qt programs set fixed hints on their **main** window;
    * several set them transiently during startup, before the real size is known.
  
  The user-visible result was a main application window arriving floating for no
  reason the user could see and no diagnostic explaining the decision.  A
  fixed-size window the size of the screen is not a dialog, and this is where
  that gets said.  Set it to NIL to float every fixed-size window, or to
  (0 . 0) to float none of them.

*FLOAT-FRACTION*
  default: 3/5
  Fraction of the output a floated window takes when it has no opinion.

*FLOAT-ON-DRAG*
  default: T
  Dragging a *tiled* window with the move binding floats it first.
  
  The alternative is that the drag does nothing, which is worse than either
  answer: the window is under the pointer, the pointer is moving, and the screen
  is not changing.  Set this to NIL to make the move binding apply only to
  windows that are already floating.

*FOCUS-AFTER-CLOSE*
  default: :STAY
  Where the cursor goes when the focused window closes.
  
    :STAY  the deepest surviving place along the old path (the default).
    :MRU   the most recently used window anywhere.
    :NEXT  the next pane in layout order.
  
  :STAY implements the governing property that *nothing moves the viewport
  except the user*.  Under :MRU the next window can be anywhere, so closing
  something can teleport you across your desktop.

*FOCUS-FOLLOWS-MOUSE*
  default: NIL
  Move the cursor to whatever pane the pointer is over.

*FOCUS-NEW-WINDOWS*
  default: T
  Move the cursor onto a window when it appears.

*FOCUSED-BORDER-COLOR*
  default: (0.4 0.65 1.0 1.0)
  Border colour of the focused pane, as (R G B A) from 0.0 to 1.0.
  
  Do not make this subtle.  Focus may rest on an *empty* pane, which has no
  window to look at, and an empty pane that does not obviously hold the cursor
  reads as a broken keyboard rather than as a place.

*GAPS*
  default: 0
  Pixels of empty space between adjacent panes.  0 is a clean grid; 4 to 8
  gives the airy look, at the cost of that much screen.

*HELP-BACKGROUND*
  default: (0.07 0.07 0.1 0.94)
  Help overlay background, as (R G B A).

*HELP-COLUMNS*
  default: 2
  How many columns of bindings the help overlay uses.
  
  Two, not three.  Three fits more rows and truncates almost every description,
  and a help screen where you can read the keys but not what they do has kept
  the wrong half.

*HELP-KEY-COLOR*
  default: (0.45 0.7 1.0 1.0)
  Colour of the key in the help overlay.

*HELP-SCALE*
  default: 1
  Integer scale factor for help-overlay text.

*HELP-TEXT-COLOR*
  default: (0.78 0.8 0.86 1.0)
  Colour of the description in the help overlay.

*HISTORY-LENGTH*
  default: 100
  How many past entries each minibuffer history ring keeps.

*HONOUR-CLIENT-MOVE-REQUESTS*
  default: T
  Let a window start its own drag when you grab its titlebar.
  
  Clients that draw their own decorations ask for this through xdg-shell and
  river forwards the request.  Refusing it makes a GTK application's titlebar
  inert, which reads as the window manager being broken rather than as a policy.

*HONOUR-EXCLUSIVE-ZONES*
  default: T
  Lay windows out inside the area panels have left, rather than over them.
  
  T is what everybody means by having a status bar: the bar takes its strip and
  the tiled windows use the rest.  NIL gives the full output to the layout and
  lets the panel float above it, which is occasionally what somebody wants for a
  transparent overlay bar and is otherwise a bug report waiting to happen.
  
  The area comes from the compositor — river subtracts every layer surface's
  exclusive zone and tells us what is left — so this works for any panel, on any
  edge, at any size, with no per-panel configuration and nothing to keep in sync.

*INPUT-RULES*
  default: NIL
  Per-device settings, as a list of (MATCHER . PLIST).
  
  The tier-0 answer to the fact that one set of global values cannot describe a
  laptop, because a laptop has a touchpad *and* a mouse and they want opposite
  things:
  
      (setf *input-rules*
            '(("Touchpad"  :natural-scroll t :accel-speed 0.3d0)
              ("Logitech"  :accel-profile :flat)
              (:keyboard   :repeat-rate 50 :repeat-delay 300)))
  
  MATCHER is T for every device, a keyword for every device of that kind
  (:KEYBOARD :POINTER :TOUCH :TABLET), a string matched case-insensitively
  against the device name, or a function of one device.  Every matching rule
  applies, in order, and a later one wins — so a rule for T is a default and a
  rule naming a device is an override.
  
  The property names are the option names without the stars: :TAP-TO-CLICK,
  :NATURAL-SCROLL, :ACCEL-SPEED, :REPEAT-RATE and the rest.  `latticewm
  --list-options' prints the whole set, and `(list-inputs)' prints what each
  device present actually supports.

*IPC-SOCKET*
  default: T
  Listen on a Unix domain socket for forms to evaluate.
  
  T uses the default path — $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/latticewm-$WAYLAND_DISPLAY.sock — a
  string or pathname names one, and NIL turns it off entirely.
  
  On by default, and safe to be: a Unix socket in the runtime directory is
  reachable only by the user who owns the session, which is the same boundary the
  Wayland socket beside it draws.  It is what SWANK should have been and is not.

*IPC-TIMEOUT-SECONDS*
  default: 10
  How long a single form may run before the socket gives up waiting.
  
  The client gets an answer either way, which is the point: a form that wedges
  the window manager should produce a message on the terminal that asked, rather
  than a shell that hangs forever with no indication of which side is stuck.

*KEYBOARD-LAYOUT*
  default: "us"
  Which shift map to use, by name.  See (SHIFT-MAP-NAMES).
  
  Shipped: "us", "uk", "de", "fr", "dvorak" and "colemak".  A list of
  (UNSHIFTED . SHIFTED) pairs may be given directly, and REGISTER-SHIFT-MAP adds
  a named one.
  
  This is the one setting somebody outside the United States has to change before
  the minibuffer can be typed into, so it is a tier-0 value with a table behind
  it rather than a constant behind a function.

*KEYS-HINT*
  default: T
  Keep a one-line reminder of the essential keys in the status line, until
  the keymap has been opened at least once.
  
  WHY THIS EXISTS, IN THE WORDS OF THE FIRST PERSON TO USE IT COLD: "i have no
  clue how to close windows or how to pick which splits".
  
  Everything needed was already there -- the welcome overlay lists these keys,
  Super+/ draws the whole keymap, and the empty pane already says `e t b to
  open'.  None of it helped, for a reason worth writing down: the welcome
  overlay is dismissed by *any* key, so the first keystroke of an impatient
  person removes it before it has been read, and every other affordance is
  behind a key you have to already know.
  
  A status line is the one place that cannot be dismissed by accident.  So the
  essentials live there until Super+/ has been pressed once, at which point the
  hint has done its job and goes away by itself rather than nagging forever.

*LEFT-HANDED*
  default: NIL
  Swap the left and right buttons.

*LOG-FILE*
  default: :DEFAULT
  Where to write the log, as a pathname — or :DEFAULT, or NIL.
  
    :DEFAULT   $XDG_STATE_HOME/latticewm/latticewm.log
    a pathname that file
    NIL        do not open a file; write to *LOG-STREAM*, which is stderr
  
  THIS DEFAULTS TO A FILE ON PURPOSE, and the reason is the failure it was
  written for.  Launched from a .desktop entry at a login screen, stderr goes
  somewhere no user can find — so the diagnostics written for exactly that
  situation were invisible at exactly the moment they were needed.  A window
  manager that fails to start and says why into a void has not said why.
  
  Everything still goes to stderr as well when stderr is a terminal, so running
  it by hand from a shell behaves the way you expect.

*LOG-KEEP*
  default: 3
  How many rotated log files to keep beside the current one.
  
  They are named latticewm.log.1 and so on, oldest discarded.  Three is enough
  to cover the session before last, which is as far back as anybody has ever
  looked.

*LOG-LEVEL*
  default: :INFO
  How much to say: :DEBUG, :INFO, :WARN, :ERROR, or NIL for silence.
  
  :DEBUG is verbose enough to follow every placement decision and is what to
  turn on before reporting anything.

*LOG-MAX-BYTES*
  default: 2097152
  Rotate the log file once it passes this many bytes.  NIL never rotates.
  
  A window manager runs for weeks and logs a line per relayout at :DEBUG, so an
  unrotated log is a slow disk leak.  Two megabytes is a few days of ordinary
  use and a couple of hours of debugging.

*MANAGE-TIMEOUT-SECONDS*
  default: 5
  Abandon a manage sequence that has run this long.  NIL to never abandon.
  
  THE FAILURE THIS EXISTS FOR IS THE WORST ONE THIS PROGRAM HAS.  River waits
  for manage_finish before processing any further input, so a policy method that
  loops forever does not hang the window manager -- it hangs *the desktop*, with
  no keyboard, no mouse and no way back except a tty.  GUARDED catches a method
  that signals and WITH-ABANDON catches an event that breaks; neither catches a
  method that simply never returns.
  
  The cost is real and worth stating.  Abandoning unwinds through whatever was
  mid-flight, and if that was a request being marshalled the connection can end
  up out of step, which river answers by closing it.  So this trades `frozen
  until you reboot' for `probably fine, possibly the session ends' -- a bad
  trade in general and a good one here, because the first outcome has no
  recovery and the second drops you back at a login screen.
  
  WITH-MANAGE-SEQUENCE's UNWIND-PROTECT still sends manage_finish on the way
  out, so the sequence itself is closed properly however the body ends.
  
  Five seconds is deliberately far beyond any legitimate relayout.  Nothing that
  finishes should ever meet it; it is a backstop, not a budget.

*MANAGE-WARN-SECONDS*
  default: 0.25
  Log a warning when a manage sequence takes longer than this.  NIL to stop.
  
  A number rather than a failure, in the shape of gate 6: the point is that a
  slow relayout is *visible* rather than that it is fatal.  A quarter second is
  about four frames, which is where a person starts to feel it.

*MIDDLE-EMULATION*
  default: NIL
  Pressing left and right together counts as a middle click.
  
  For the machines that have two physical buttons and no third.  NIL leaves the
  device's default, which is off.

*MINIBUFFER-CANDIDATES-SHOWN*
  default: 6
  How many completion candidates the echo area lists at once.

*MINIBUFFER-CARET-COLOR*
  default: (0.95 0.75 0.35 1.0)
  Colour of the caret — the bar showing where what you type will go.

*MINIBUFFER-COMPLETION-COLOR*
  default: (0.5 0.55 0.65 1.0)
  Colour of the completion hint after what you have typed.

*MINIBUFFER-PROMPT-COLOR*
  default: (0.95 0.75 0.35 1.0)
  Colour of the prompt in the echo area.

*MODIFIER*
  default: :SUPER
  The modifier every default binding uses.
  
  :SUPER is the only one that does not collide with something an application
  already wants.

*MODIFIER-ALIASES*
  default: ((:SHIFT . :SHIFT) (:CTRL . :CTRL) (:CONTROL . :CTRL) (:C . :CTRL)
            (:ALT . :MOD1) (:MOD1 . :MOD1) (:META . :MOD1) (:M . :MOD1)
            (:MOD3 . :MOD3) (:SUPER . :MOD4) (:MOD4 . :MOD4) (:LOGO . :MOD4)
            (:WIN . :MOD4) (:S . :MOD4) (:HYPER . :MOD5) (:MOD5 . :MOD5))
  What people type, mapped to what the protocol calls it.
  
  Both `super' and `mod4' work, and so do `C-' and `ctrl', because muscle memory
  differs and refusing one of them is a pointless fight to pick.
  
  Add your own spellings rather than learning ours.  This is a tier-0 value, so
  a config file can do it without a method:
  
      (push '(:h . :mod5) *modifier-aliases*)

*MOTION-CROSSES-OUTPUTS*
  default: T
  Walking off the edge of one monitor arrives on the next one.
  
  MOTION IS CONTINUOUS ACROSS EVERY BOUNDARY, and the screen is the last
  boundary this program was not crossing.  Motion already leaves a split when
  the direction crosses its axis, and crosses into the lattice cell next door
  entering through the edge it left by; pressing Right at the right-hand edge of
  the left monitor did nothing at all, which made two monitors feel like two
  window managers.
  
  It costs no key.  With one monitor there is nothing in any direction and the
  behaviour is unchanged to the character, so this is invisible until a second
  screen is plugged in -- which is when somebody wants it.
  
  Where you arrive is where you last were on that screen (see *REMEMBER-PLACE*),
  not its first pane, because arriving somewhere you did not choose is what made
  the explicit commands not worth pressing either.
  
  Set it to NIL for motion that stops at the edge of a workspace, and reach the
  other screen with FOCUS-OUTPUT.

*MOTION-REFERENCE-RECT*
  default: (0 0 1920 1080)
  The nominal output used to compute geometry for motion when no layout has
  been drawn yet, as (X Y WIDTH HEIGHT).
  
  Only the aspect ratio matters, and only for deciding which pane lines up with
  which across a boundary.  You will not need to change this.

*MOVE-INTO-OCCUPIED*
  default: :SPLIT
  What dropping a window onto an occupied pane means: :SPLIT, :SWAP or :STACK.
  
  :SPLIT is shipped because it is the only one that never destroys structure.
  SWAP remains a separate verb with its own binding, so nothing is lost.

*NATURAL-SCROLL*
  default: NIL
  Scroll content in the direction of the fingers, as on a phone.
  
  NIL matches libinput's default and the behaviour of a mouse wheel.  Set it per
  device rather than globally if you want it on the touchpad and off on the
  mouse, which is what most people who want it at all actually want:
  
      (setf *input-rules* '(("Touchpad" :natural-scroll t)))

*NEW-CHILD-SIDE*
  default: :AFTER
  Which side of the existing pane a new sibling lands on: :AFTER or :BEFORE.

*NEW-WORKSPACE*
  default: :EMPTY
  What a workspace contains at the moment it comes into existence.
  
    :EMPTY      one empty pane.  DESIGN D19's starting state, and the shipped
                answer: a place with nothing in it, where typing a key spawns
                something.
    a FUNCTION  called with (WORLD INDEX); whatever node it returns is the new
                workspace.  Returning NIL falls back to :EMPTY rather than
                putting a hole in the workspace list.
  
  Two values and not a vocabulary of ten.  Anything a further keyword could have
  named, a two-line lambda names better and in the user's own words:
  
      (setf *new-workspace*
            (lambda (world index)
              (declare (ignore world index))
              (c:make-split :horizontal (list (c:make-leaf) (c:make-leaf)))))
  
  Specialize MAKE-WORKSPACE instead when the answer belongs to a *policy* rather
  than to a person — that is what the lattice does, and it is why every workspace
  born after `lattice:enable' is a plane rather than a pane.
  
  WHICH MEANS THIS OPTION IS NOT READ AT ALL UNDER THE LATTICE, and that used to
  be a sentence you had to find here and trust.  It is a fact about the image
  now: `latticewm --extension-surface' lists the overriding method under this
  option as an `overridden by', and gate 15 requires an override of that shape to
  offer an option of its own — the lattice offers *NEW-WORKSPACE-CELLS*.

*NOT-REPEATABLE*
  default: ("repeat" "run-command-by-name" "undo" "redo")
  Commands that REPEAT should look straight through, by name.
  
  Four of them, for two reasons.  `repeat' itself, because repeating a repeat is
  a fixed point and not a useful one; `run-command-by-name', because what you
  meant by pressing `.' after M-x is the command M-x ran — the prompt was how you
  said it, not what you said; and undo and redo, because `.' after an undo means
  `do that thing again', and the thing you did was not undoing.
  
  This is the *data* behind COMMAND-REPEATABLE-P, which is the extension point.
  A denylist of names cannot express `not repeatable under these circumstances',
  so a command that should be repeatable when it acted and not when it declined
  is a method on the generic rather than an entry here.

*NUMLOCK*
  default: NIL
  Turn num lock on for every keyboard as it appears.
  
  T is what somebody with a full-size keyboard and a numeric keypad wants and
  nothing else does.

*OUTER-GAPS*
  default: 0
  Pixels of empty space between the layout and the edge of the output.

*OVERLAY-BUFFER-IDLE*
  default: (:HELP)
  Which overlays release their pixel buffers while hidden.
  
  A list of overlay kinds, or T for all of them, or NIL for none.
  
  THE ARITHMETIC THIS OPTION WAS ARGUED FROM WAS WRONG BY 8x IN THE AUTHOR'S OWN
  FAVOUR.  It read: "A full-screen ARGB buffer is about four megabytes ... keeping
  their buffers costs eight megabytes of resident memory to save one allocation on
  a keypress, which is the wrong way round."  Four megabytes is 1920x1080x4 at
  scale 1.  MAKE-CANVAS multiplies by the output's scale *before* computing the
  stride, because that is what HiDPI means, so on the 1920x1080 panel at scale 2
  the machine was sitting in front of, a full-screen canvas is 3840x2160x4 = 33
  megabytes.  Two buffers of it — and there are two now, because one was a race
  against the compositor — is 66.
  
  Which makes both halves of the sentence bigger, in opposite directions, and
  that is why this is a list rather than a boolean.  Releasing is worth much more
  than it said for the help screen: 66 MB resident for a page shown for four
  seconds a week is not a trade anybody would take.  It is worth much less than
  it said for anything toggled continuously — the drawn map appears when a zoom
  crosses a threshold, and a threshold crossed by a continuous gesture is crossed
  repeatedly, so releasing there means mkstemp, ftruncate(33MB), mmap and
  create_pool twice per wobble.
  
  So the shipped answer is the one overlay that is large and rare, by name, and
  everything else keeps what it has.  T restores the old behaviour for every
  overlay including an extension's; NIL keeps every buffer forever.

*POINTER-BINDINGS*
  default: ((:MOVE :BTN-LEFT (:SUPER)) (:RESIZE :BTN-RIGHT (:SUPER)))
  Which button, with which modifiers, starts which interactive operation.
  
  A list of (OPERATION BUTTON MODIFIERS).  OPERATION is :MOVE or :RESIZE — or
  anything an extension has taught POINTER-DRAG-RECT about.  BUTTON is a keyword
  from +POINTER-BUTTONS+ or a raw event code, and MODIFIERS is written the way a
  key binding's is.
  
  Super+drag to move and Super+right-drag to resize is the convention every
  floating window manager has used for thirty years, and it is chosen here for
  the reason it was chosen there: it works anywhere in the window, so you never
  have to hit a title bar or a five-pixel corner.
  
  Note what is deliberately absent: a *bare* left-drag binding.  A window manager
  that grabs unmodified left-click cannot be used with any application, and the
  mistake is easy to make because it looks like it works right up until you try
  to select text.

*POINTER-RESIZE-MINIMUM*
  default: (120 . 80)
  The smallest a window may be dragged to, as (WIDTH . HEIGHT) in pixels.
  
  Not zero, because a window dragged down to nothing cannot be dragged back —
  its corner is no longer anywhere the pointer can reach.

*POINTER-SNAP*
  default: 12
  Snap a dragged window to within this many pixels of an output edge.
  
  Zero turns it off.  Twelve gives the behaviour where a window dropped near an
  edge lines up with it exactly, which is the one piece of drag polish that is
  worth having and the one people notice is missing.

*READLINE-CHORDS*
  default: "abdefgknpuwy"
  Which Ctrl-letter chords a prompt reads.
  
  The keys fingers press at a prompt without being asked: C-a, C-e, C-k, C-w and
  the rest.  Bound only while a prompt is up, so C-w still means close-tab to the
  browser underneath.
  
  An option rather than a constant because the two obvious other answers are a
  whole different muscle memory -- a vi user wants almost none of these and a
  readline maximalist wants more -- and because it is the one part of
  CAPTURE-KEYS somebody might reasonably want to change without writing a
  method.

*REMEMBER-PLACE*
  default: T
  Come back to where you were standing in a workspace, rather than to its top.
  
  Switching to a workspace used to put the cursor at its first leaf, always.  On
  one monitor that is a small annoyance you stop noticing; with two it is the
  thing that makes crossing between screens not worth doing, because every
  crossing costs you your place and there is no key that gives it back.
  
  The memory is a property of the *workspace*, not of the output.  That is the
  smaller and the more correct of the two: the cursor is one place in one model
  (see SHOW-WORKSPACE-ON, which rules that a command must not move the keyboard
  to another monitor), so what a workspace has to remember is where you stood in
  it — and a workspace that moves to the other screen takes that with it, which
  is what anybody would expect and what a per-output table would get wrong.
  
  The stored path is relative to the workspace node rather than to the root, so
  it stays true if the workspace is not where it was in the stack.  A remembered
  path that no longer leads anywhere is not a problem to check for: it goes
  through REPAIR-PATH like every other stale path in this program, which lands
  you at the deepest surviving part of where you were — still closer than the
  top.
  
  Set it to NIL to always arrive at the first pane, which is deterministic and
  which some people genuinely prefer.

*REPEAT-DELAY*
  default: NIL
  Milliseconds a key must be held before it starts repeating, or NIL.
  
  300 is brisk, 600 is the usual default, and below about 200 an ordinary
  keypress starts repeating before your finger has left it.

*REPEAT-RATE*
  default: NIL
  Key repeats per second once a held key starts repeating, or NIL for the
  compositor's default.
  
  25 is a common choice and 50 is fast.  Set together with *REPEAT-DELAY*: the
  two are one decision and river takes them in one request.

*RESIZE-AMOUNT*
  default: 1/20
  How much one press of the resize key moves a divider.
  
  A fraction of the container: 1/20 is five percent of the pane's parent, which
  is about the smallest step that is visible in one press and the largest that
  does not overshoot.  RESIZE takes it as an optional argument, so a binding can
  ask for a coarser one without changing this.

*SAVE-INTERVAL-SECONDS*
  default: 5
  How long the layout may sit changed before it is written out.
  
  Not zero, because a layout change happens a hundred times a second while a
  resize key is held and a hundred file writes would be absurd.  Not large,
  because everything between the last write and a crash is lost.  Five seconds is
  the point where the writes are invisible and the loss is a shrug.
  
  NIL saves only at a clean shutdown, which is what this program used to do —
  SAVE-STATE-SOON existed, was documented, and was called from nowhere at all, so
  any crash, any kill -9 and any compositor exit lost the session layout.

*SCROLL-BUTTON*
  default: NIL
  The button held down for :ON-BUTTON-DOWN scrolling, as an evdev code.
  
  274 is BTN_MIDDLE, which is the one anybody means.  NIL leaves the device's
  default.  Only consulted when *SCROLL-METHOD* is :ON-BUTTON-DOWN.

*SCROLL-FACTOR*
  default: NIL
  Multiply every scroll event's distance by this.
  
  A positive real, or NIL for the compositor's default of 1.  This is river's own
  knob rather than libinput's, so it works on devices libinput does not drive,
  and it is the right answer for `my scrolling is too fast in every application'
  — which is a compositor-level complaint dressed as an application one.

*SCROLL-METHOD*
  default: NIL
  How scrolling is expressed on a touchpad or trackpoint.
  
    NIL              leave the device's own default alone
    :TWO-FINGER      two fingers anywhere on the pad
    :EDGE            one finger along the right-hand edge
    :ON-BUTTON-DOWN  hold *SCROLL-BUTTON* and move — the trackpoint answer
    :NO-SCROLL       off
  
  :ON-BUTTON-DOWN with *SCROLL-BUTTON* set to the middle button is the
  configuration every ThinkPad user recreates by hand on every new machine.

*SHIFT-MAP*
  default: NIL
  An explicit shift map, overriding *KEYBOARD-LAYOUT*, or NIL to use it.
  
  Kept because it was the documented way to do this and configurations in the
  wild will have set it.  Prefer *KEYBOARD-LAYOUT*, which names a whole layout
  rather than requiring you to write one out:
  
      (setf *keyboard-layout* "de")
  
  To adjust a shipped layout rather than replace it, append to it:
  
      (setf *shift-map* (append '((#\8 . #\() (#\9 . #\)))
                                (find-shift-map "us")))

*SHOW-EMPTY-PANES*
  default: T
  Draw an outline around empty panes, and the spawn hints inside the focused
  one.
  
  Turning this off gives you a window manager where standing in an empty pane
  looks exactly like a broken keyboard.  It is here because it is an option, not
  because it is a good idea.

*SMART-GAPS*
  default: T
  Drop the screen-edge gap and the border when one pane is alone on a screen.
  
  *One pane, not one window*, and the difference is three cases.  An empty pane
  beside a window is a second pane and keeps both borders, because DESIGN D18
  makes focus a place and an unmarked empty pane reads as a broken keyboard.
  Three tabs on a workspace are one pane, because that is what is on the screen.
  A floating window is not a pane at all, so it neither counts nor changes.
  
  Inner gaps need no case: DIVIDE-RECT spends GAP once per *boundary between*
  children, so a single pane already spends none.
  
  Set to NIL to keep the gap and the border however few windows are up.  A
  window rule that sets :BORDER-WIDTH still wins, on the window it names.

*SPAWN-MODE*
  default: :SPLIT
  Where a new window goes.  DESIGN D14 rules that all three ship.
  
    :SPLIT       split the focused pane and put it beside — Emacs, hyprland.
    :FILL-FIRST  drop it in the nearest empty pane if there is one, else split.
    :STACK       add it as a tab on the focused pane.
  
  :SPLIT is the shipped default because it is the behaviour nobody has to be
  taught.

*SPLIT-AXIS*
  default: :LONGER
  How a fresh split is cut.
  
    :LONGER      along whichever axis is longer, so panes tend towards square.
    :HORIZONTAL  always side by side.
    :VERTICAL    always stacked.
  
  :LONGER is the default because fixed-axis splitting produces slivers as soon
  as you go three deep, and everybody's first configuration change in the
  fixed-axis window managers is to add a 'split the other way' binding.

*SWANK-INTERFACE*
  default: "127.0.0.1"
  Which address SWANK binds to when it is on.
  
  Loopback, explicitly, rather than whatever the default happens to be — because
  `whatever the default happens to be' for a REPL that executes arbitrary code is
  not a thing to leave to a library's changing mind.  Set it to "0.0.0.0" if you
  genuinely want a REPL reachable from the network and understand that this hands
  your session to anybody who can route to it.

*SWANK-PORT*
  default: NIL
  The TCP port SWANK listens on, or NIL for no SWANK server.
  
  *OFF BY DEFAULT, AND THAT IS A DELIBERATE CHANGE FROM 4005.*  SWANK offers
  arbitrary code execution as the logged-in user with no authentication step, and
  it used to start unconditionally, before the user had done anything, in a
  program that ships as a session binary.  For a development tool that is normal
  and excellent; for a default it is the kind of surprise that ends up in a CVE
  database rather than in a bug tracker.
  
  WHAT IS LOST BY HAVING IT OFF, SAID HONESTLY -- because this docstring used to
  say `nothing is lost' and that was wrong about the audience the project names
  two paragraphs earlier.  The control socket in runtime/ipc.lisp is on by
  default, is reachable only by the user who owns the session, and covers
  scripting completely; and `latticewm --eval' and Super+; are both live.  None
  of that is `M-x slime-connect, C-c C-c on a DEFMETHOD, watch the windows move',
  which is a Lisper's whole relationship with a running Lisp program and is the
  one thing no other Wayland compositor can offer.  A socket that takes one form
  per line is a scripting interface.  Nobody rallies around a socket.
  
  So the default stays off and the *remedy is made loud* instead: it is one line,
  and the starter configuration this program writes into every user's home
  directory now says so, in the paragraph a Lisper reads first, rather than
  telling them to connect to a port nothing is listening on.
  
      latticewm --swank-port 4005
      (setf *swank-port* 4005)   ; in init.lisp
  
  THE STANDING QUESTION IS A UNIX SOCKET.  runtime/ipc.lisp solved this exact
  trust problem -- $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR, mode 0600, owner-only, chmod before listen
  -- and a SWANK on those terms could be on by default with none of the argument
  above applying to it.  SWANK's CREATE-SERVER takes a port, so that is work in
  SWANK's socket layer rather than a flag here, and it is not done.  It is the
  right shape of answer and it is written down here rather than in a plan nobody
  reads.
  
  See also *SWANK-INTERFACE*, which decides who may reach it.

*TAP-AND-DRAG*
  default: T
  Tap, then hold and move, to drag without pressing the pad down.
  
  Only meaningful where *TAP-TO-CLICK* is on.  Matches libinput's default.

*TAP-TO-CLICK*
  default: T
  Tap a touchpad to click, rather than pressing it down.
  
  T on every touchpad that supports it and ignored by everything that does not,
  which is the shape most of these options have: a setting a device cannot honour
  is reported in `list-inputs' and never sent.
  
  On by default, against libinput's own default of off, and deliberately: every
  desktop environment that ships a touchpad panel turns this on, the people who
  want it off know they want it off, and a window manager whose touchpad appears
  not to respond to taps reads as broken rather than as conservative.

*TERMINAL*
  default: "foot"
  The terminal emulator the `terminal' command runs.

*UI-FONT*
  default: NIL
  The font to draw interface text in, by name, or NIL for the built-in one.
  
      (setf *ui-font* "ter-118n")
  
  Names come from FONT-NAMES.  The shipped Terminus is registered as
  "terminus".  LOAD-PSF registers any console font on disk under its own file
  name, so putting a different one everywhere is two lines in a config file:
  
      (register-font (load-psf "/usr/share/kbd/consolefonts/ter-124n.psf.gz"))
      (setf *ui-font* "ter-124n")
  
  Per-role control is one method rather than one option -- see FONT-FOR.

*UNDO-COALESCE-SECONDS*
  default: 0.6
  Merge repeated changes made within this long into one undo step.
  
  Holding the resize key produces forty tree changes a second, and forty undo
  steps to get back across one drag is not undo, it is a rewind button.  NIL
  records every change separately.

*UNDO-DEPTH*
  default: 32
  How many previous layouts to keep.  0 turns undo off entirely.
  
  Thirty-two is far more than anybody walks back through and costs a few hundred
  kilobytes at the very most, because a snapshot is a tree of a few dozen nodes
  and the windows in it are shared rather than copied.

*UNFLOAT-RETURNS-HOME*
  default: T
  Put an unfloated window back where it was floated from, if that place survives.
  
  T is the symmetry with minimize and restore, and the argument ON-RESTORE's
  docstring makes applies verbatim: "landing back where you were is the
  difference between minimize being useful and being a way to lose a window".
  Floating something to look at it and then putting it back is the same gesture,
  and it had the opposite behaviour — unfloat dropped the window at the cursor,
  wherever that happened to be by then.
  
  NIL restores the old behaviour: an unfloated window lands at the cursor, which
  is what you want if you use floating as a way of *moving* windows around.

*UNFOCUSED-BORDER-COLOR*
  default: (0.22 0.22 0.26 1.0)
  Border colour of every pane that is not focused.

*WARN-ON-REBINDING*
  default: T
  Say so when DEFINE-KEY replaces a binding with a *different* command.
  
  Rebinding is the point of a keymap and is not worth mentioning.  Silently
  taking a key that already meant something else is different, and it is how an
  extension removes a feature nobody knows it removed.
  
  The lattice did exactly that: enabling it rebound Super+/ from `help' to
  `lattice-status', so loading an optional extension quietly deleted the one
  key that finds every other key -- while the status line went on advising
  people to press it.  Nothing said anything, because nothing was watching.
  
  Re-binding a key to the same command is silent, so reloading a config file
  says nothing.

*WARN-ON-UNDECLARED-HOOKS*
  default: T
  Complain when ADD-HOOK is given a name no DEFHOOK declared.
  
  An undeclared hook is not an error -- ADD-HOOK works on any name, and an
  extension is entitled to invent its own and run it itself.  It is, however,
  the single easiest way to write a line of configuration that does nothing at
  all, silently, forever.
  
  That happened while writing the hardware check for this project: it hung its
  output recording on :RELAYOUT, which is not a hook this system runs.  The
  config loaded, the function was never called, and the report was empty with no
  indication why.  On a tty, with no editor, that costs the trip.
  
  The check is a hash lookup on a path taken a handful of times at startup, so
  it is free in any sense that matters.  Set this to NIL if you run your own
  hooks and would rather not hear about it.

*WELCOME-ON-FIRST-RUN*
  default: T
  Show the welcome overlay the first time LatticeWM starts.
  
  Once only, and it writes a marker under $XDG_STATE_HOME so it never appears
  again.  Set this to NIL to suppress it entirely; M-x welcome shows it on
  demand either way.

*WINDOW-RULES*
  default: NIL
  Declarative per-window overrides, as a list of (MATCH . OVERRIDES).
  
  MATCH is a plist selecting windows; OVERRIDES is a plist of what to do with
  them.  The first rule that matches wins, so put the specific ones first.
  
      (setf *window-rules*
            '(((:app-id "pavucontrol")           :float t)
              ((:app-id "firefox")               :workspace 2)
              ((:title-contains "Picture-in")    :float t :border-color (1 0.4 0 1))
              ((:parent t)                         :float t)))
  
  MATCH keys:
  
      :app-id           the app id, exactly, ignoring case
      :app-id-contains  a substring of it
      :title            the title, exactly, ignoring case
      :title-contains   a substring of it
      :parent           T for windows river reports as having a parent
  
  OVERRIDE keys are the ones in +WINDOW-RULE-KEYS+: :float, :workspace, :path,
  :focus, :fullscreen, :minimize, :border-color, :border-width, :decoration,
  :capabilities, :tags and :label.
  
  :LABEL IS WHAT THIS PROGRAM CALLS THE WINDOW when it has to name it -- in the
  status line, on the drawn map, in a notification, in the tag and scratchpad
  lists, and in a log line about it.  It is a name and not an address: two
  windows may share one, and finding a window by name is what :TAGS is for.  See
  WINDOW-NAME, which is the generic every one of those places asks.
  
  This is the tier-0 half of window placement.  The tier-1 half is a method on
  WINDOW-RULE-FOR, and the tier-2 half is a method on ON-WINDOW-OPEN; all three
  are supported and this one requires no Lisp beyond a quoted list.

*XKB-LAYOUT*
  default: NIL
  The keyboard layout the compositor should use: "us", "de", "us,de".
  
  NIL — the default — leaves whatever river started with, which comes from
  XKB_DEFAULT_LAYOUT in the session environment.  Setting this compiles a keymap
  and hands it to every keyboard; see RUNTIME:APPLY-KEYBOARD-LAYOUT for what that
  needs.
  
  *THIS IS THE OPTION THAT DECIDES WHETHER THE PROGRAM IS USABLE AT ALL* for
  somebody who does not type on a US keyboard, and until it existed the only
  answer was to set an environment variable before river started — which is not
  something a window manager may ask of its user.
  
  NOT THE SAME THING AS *KEYBOARD-LAYOUT*, and the difference is worth one
  sentence because the names are close.  This one changes *what the keys do*, for
  every application on the machine.  *KEYBOARD-LAYOUT* is a shift map: it tells
  the window manager what the shifted glyphs are, so that its own prompt inserts
  the right character.  Setting this one adopts the matching shift map
  automatically when a table of that name is registered, so in the ordinary case
  you set this and nothing else.

*XKB-MODEL*
  default: NIL
  The XKB model, e.g. "pc105".  NIL uses the default, which is nearly always
  right on anything made this century.

*XKB-OPTIONS*
  default: NIL
  XKB options, comma separated, e.g. "ctrl:nocaps,grp:alt_shift_toggle".
  
  `ctrl:nocaps' — caps lock becomes control — is the single most requested one
  and is most of why this option exists.

*XKB-RULES*
  default: NIL
  The XKB rules set, e.g. "evdev".  NIL uses the default.

*XKB-VARIANT*
  default: NIL
  The XKB variant, e.g. "nodeadkeys", "dvorak", "colemak", or NIL.
  
  Comma separated, one per layout, when *XKB-LAYOUT* names several.

